A few weeks ago, a work by
British street artist Banksy
went up for auction
at Sotheby's London.
Moments after the
auctioneer banged his gavel
announcing its sale
for over $1.3 million,
a beep sounded and
the canvas began
to fall through the
bottom of the frame
and emerge in shreds
on the other side
just after Banksy
posted a picture of it
with the caption
going, going, gone
and then followed up
with a video showing
how he installed a shredder
in the frame in case
it ever went up for auction.
Sotheby's claimed
they had no idea
that this was going to
happen and had been Banksyed.
And the buyer was anonymous,
which is common in auctions.
After a week when
media conjecture had
run dry over who knew about
it and would the buyer have
to pay for it, Sotheby's
put out a press
release explaining that
what actually happened
was that a new work by
Banksy had been created
at the auction, one that's been
authenticated by the artist
and given the new title
"Love is in the Bin".
After that, Banksy released a
director's cut explaining that
in rehearsals, the paintings
shredded fully every time,
including some vertical video
to firmly place the rehearsals
in the recent past, proving both
that he's a master manipulator
and that his word
cannot be trusted.
OK, but let's take a closer look
at what this work actually is.
Banksy first painted the
image of a child reaching out
toward a red, heart-shaped
balloon in London in 2002,
this one with the inscription
"There is always hope."
Other versions were
made around the city,
but none of the
original murals remain
because this, like
most of Banksy's work,
was unsanctioned street
art made without permission
for the public to enjoy and
for property owners or city
government to paint over
or protect as they see fit.
Individuals can and have
tried to remove and resell
his public art, but
for the most part
Banksy's work has
been fleeting and free
and is actively planned to
be that way by its creator.
The heart balloon
appeared alone in 2013
with bandages in Brooklyn
and also with kids standing
on a pile of guns at a Central
Park art stall on sale for $60.
In 2014, he reworked the girl
with balloon image in supported
the With Syria
campaign, explaining,
"The red balloon carries
the girl above and away
from the chaos below, beyond
the burnt-out buildings
and bullet-potted walls."
Also in 2014, Justin Bieber had
the image tattooed on his arm.
A version with a
Union Jack balloon
surfaced in 2017
in a print Banksy
tried to give away to UK
citizens in some constituencies
if they voted against
the Conservative Party.
But since it's illegal to accept
a gift in return for a vote,
the offer was rescinded.
And a few days later
he posted this.
In a 2017 poll,
"Girl with Balloon"
beat out both this painting
by JMW Turner and this one
by David Hockney
to claim the title
of the UK's favorite artwork.
This is all to say that by
the time the work in question
arrived at auction it was
a well-loved and widely
recognizable image,
estimated to sell for as much
as about $400,000 US.
The auction report
shares that it's not
a multiple but a
unique work made
in 2006 with Banksy's signature
method of stenciled spray
paint but this time on
canvas instead of on a wall
or as a print on paper.
It was authenticated by
Pest Control, the handling
service that acts on
the artist's behalf
and authenticates his work.
Sotheby's claims it was acquired
directly from the artist
by the unnamed
present owner the year
it was made following a show
he organized of his work
in an LA warehouse, and it
came in that gilded frame--
ah, the frame-- which
Sotheby's states was,
quote, "chosen by
Banksy himself."
Gold frames are one of the
artist's favorite motifs.
In conjunction with that
same LA warehouse show,
he released a print
that clearly expresses
his dubiousness of
the auction process
and even presented it in
a ridiculous gold frame.
And for his 2009 exhibition
at the Bristol museum,
Banksy mixed his works in with
the museum's collection, many
of them in period appropriate
frames, helping his art
blend in, at least sort of.
One of these was a gold frame
laid over a concrete slab
with one stick figure asking,
"Does anyone really take
this kind of art seriously?",
and another replying,
"Never underestimate the
power of a big gold frame."
A year later, this
image appeared on a wall
in San Francisco
clearly demonstrating
the uneasy situation
Banksy has found himself
in as his profile has risen
and more and more people try
to benefit of unauthorized sales
and exhibitions of his work.
Now I find it unlikely that
no one at Sotheby's knew
what was going to happen
with this big gold frame
or that anyone
inspecting it would find
nothing suspicious about it.
I also find it unconvincing
that Banksy's video
showing his frame construction
was made back in 2006
or that it's
coincidental that it was
the last lot in the auction.
Banksy very well could
have been the prior owner.
Sotheby's doesn't have to
disclose that information.
Regardless, what
happened indicates
very strongly that people
really do take this kind of art
seriously.
They probably would
have even if it
hadn't been in the gold
frame, but they're certainly
taking it even more seriously
now that the frame has
revealed itself to be an
integral part of the work.
When he posted his video, Banksy
included the quote by Picasso,
"The urge to destroy is
also a creative urge."
And Banksy certainly
isn't the first artist
to incorporate
destruction in art making.
Man Ray made his first
indestructible object
in 1923, an altered
metronome that the viewer
is instructed to smash
when they've reached,
quote, "the limit of endurance."
Robert Rauschenberg is famous
for his 1953 erased Willem de
Kooning drawing, and Nicki
de Saint Phalle for her 1961
exhibition in which
she asks visitors
to fire at her relief paintings
with a .22 caliber rifle.
There are many ways a work of
art comes into being, be it
an additive process,
a subtractive process,
one that must unfold
in space and time,
or one that's
immaterial, not existing
until the moment it's
performed and then disappearing
as soon as it's over.
"Girl with Balloon"
was one artwork,
and now it's another
that came into being
through a public action but
which still very much has
a material presence because
the object wasn't destroyed.
It's only half shredded.
And since it was
canvas going through,
the remaining fringe
is pretty stable.
I can totally see an
art packer carefully
crafting a crate that
will keep it safe
and sound until its
next exhibition.
It really only got more
interesting when shredded.
Editioned prints, or
paintings of Banksy's images,
even if sanctioned by the
artist, are all right,
but they certainly don't
have the subversive power
or presence of his art made
in and for the public arena.
His gilt frames had
served the purpose
of emphasizing the artificiality
of putting these images meant
for the public
into private hands,
but now one of those
frames has revealed
itself to be an agent
of insurrection,
however incomplete its
act of destruction.
And the art world loves being
questioned and criticized.
It's weird.
It's almost like a kind
of high-class nagging
which they've even given their
own academic-sounding term.
Institutional critique is what
they call the art that actively
critiques the
structures it lives in
and that make it possible,
like museums or galleries
or, in this case,
an auction house.
It became a thing
after institutions
started to collect more
ephemeral and performative
works made by artists
in the '60s and '70s
by artists strategically
trying to avoid
the traditional spaces for art.
But no matter.
Museums were happy
to matriculate
these invasive works and include
them in their histories of art,
and in many cases people
proved willing to buy them too.
And so it's not
at all surprising
when something as
straightforwardly material
as this work by Banksy can fetch
such a high price at auction,
and it's not
surprising either when
its collector is willing
to accept it's transformed
and likely even
more valuable state,
especially now
that post action it
embodies some aspect
of the subversion that
makes Banksy Banksy.
It can actually live more
comfortably in an exhibition
now than it could
before, hanging half
in and out of its frame, telling
its own history of Banksy's
shenanigans.
But there's also another
important element of this work
that we might be overlooking,
and that's the publicity
and press that has
swirled around it,
which I'd argue is as much a
part of the work as what went
down at Sotheby's.
Banksy is brilliant at
attracting attention
and generating controversy.
His anonymity is part of that
and something I hope never
goes away.
With this work,
he draws attention
to the auction
process in general,
which is followed closely only
by an extremely tiny community.
Most of us see headlines about
multimillion dollar sales,
feel nauseous, and then move on.
The auction system
in its current form
survives in part because most
people aren't paying attention
to it.
It's a highly efficient way
for the international uber-rich
to buy and trade
valuable assets.
Sure, some are in the
game for good reasons,
but Banksy's action
has made us all more
aware of a few key facts.
People are willing to pay
ungodly sums of money for art
these days.
With rare exceptions, none of
that money goes to the artists.
These are secondary
sales, meaning
one owner is selling to another.
Most artists are
completely powerless when
their work goes to auction.
To take back some of that
power, you might have to get
your hands a little dirty, like
when Damien Hirst orchestrated
his own direct-to-auction sale
in 2008 and like this recent
stunt by Banksy, which may or
may not have been executed with
the cooperation of Sotheby's.
Whether or not we assume
what Banksy says is true--
which we really shouldn't--
"Love is in the Bin"
still reminds us
of the convoluted
power structures
that vie for what
art and which artists
get anointed as
important and valuable.
We like Banksy's work because
it helps us see the gross power
imbalances all around
us, even if they're
imperfect and temporary and
corruptible by outside forces,
or perhaps we love them more
because of those things.
Banksy may seem like less of the
pure countercultural rebel he
once was, but I,
for one, appreciate
these recent attempts at
effecting change, however
small, from the inside, or at
least with one foot in and one
foot out, able to
capture money from sales
that will happen with
or without his blessing,
and perhaps apply those proceeds
to new work in the future.
I, for one, will be looking
out for some very public
$1.3 million
expenditures from Banksy
in the not-too-distant future.
I'll leave it to
him to surprise me.
Do you want to know more
about money so you can maybe
buy a Banksy one day?
"Two Cents" is a
PBS Digital Studios
series about money and you.
Financial experts and husband
and wife team Philip Olson
and Julia Lorenz-Olson guide
you through the complex world
of personal finance.
You'll get practical
knowledge and insight
into how your brain is hardwired
to react to economic problems.
Check the link in
the description below
to subscribe to "Two Cents."
Thanks to all of our patrons
for supporting the "Art
Assignment", especially Vincent
Apa and Indianapolis Homes
Realty.
Visit patreon.com/artassignment
if you'd like to learn more
about how you can
support the channel.
[MUSIC PLAYING]